Hello, you from Telecommunications Dispute Resolution.
Yeah. Yes. Thank you so much. We have 10 minutes with you.
Wonderful. Includes, um, uh,
any questions if there is any time left? Cool. Thank you.
Wonderful. Um, good morning
and thank you so much for making the time to hear me.
Um, look, I won't report, um, obviously repeat my, um,
submission in, in, in its entirety,
but just a few kind of remarks from me,
I guess in the first instance.
My name's Herman Sji. I'm the CEO of TDRL.
So we've been operating for 19 years as a free, independent
and specialist dispute resolution and for consumers
and SMEs within the telecommunication sector.
Um, our membership is currently about 37 brands covering
about 87% ish
of consumers within those, that kind of category.
So it's a pretty wide covering.
Um, and we've got a strong
and growing consumer awareness, uh, with NBE, um,
surveys in 2024, noting that we're middle
of the pack in terms of consumer awareness, a above a lot
of the, the peer schemes and other sectors.
Um, but behind things like the Dispute tribunal
and obviously the banking on's been.
So in terms of my focus today,
three things I'd like to pick up.
Uh, first is the threshold
for membership point, um, under the bill.
Second is, um, consistency of standards for consumers.
And the third is consistency of standards
for dispute resolution schemes and sector.
So starting with the threshold for membership.
So, um, consumer dispute resolution is a very important part
of consumer issue resolution
and it sits alongside things like the court system,
the traditional civil court system
and the disputes tribunal.
But where it has a distinct advantage is it
generally is free for consumers.
It's timely, speedy, um, and it's specialist to the sector.
So it means issues can be resolved quickly and actually
because it is not a court,
you often find providers are much more willing to engage
with these processes and just fix the problem.
Um, in our case, the majority of cases that are raised
with us by consumers are resolved within a small number
of days, um, almost 90% of them under 15 days.
So it's quick, you know,
you don't get that in any other system.
Um, in Australia, membership of dispute resolution schemes
for the is compulsory
and the, um, top communication industry onwards in Australia
has compulsory membership
and that's been very positive
for the Australian market in New Zealand.
We haven't bought the same compulsion,
although as I've said, um, currently just under 90%
of consumers have access to a scheme.
Um, and that's ourselves in UDL, which has I think about 3%
of consumers that we've got the remainder.
So it's fairly well done.
But, um, as pointed out by, um,
the information cabinet paper from Commerce Commission,
it's about 200,000 consumers aren't currently covered.
So, um, our submission is essentially that the barriers
to entry in the market are very low.
Um, the benefits
of dispute resolution are very high for consumers.
And so actually we believe that it should be a compulsory,
um, requirement for all, uh,
providers providing telecommunication services in this,
in the retail sector to join a scheme.
And we think that's one because the benefit is high,
but actually the impost on them is also very low.
We note in the, um, bill,
there's a $50 million threshold revenue threshold
for compulsory membership.
In the initial policy decisions it was 10 million
and that change was due to a perceived,
and I would say, uh, uh,
not quite accurately perceived impost on
providers of joining your scheme.
Um, in terms of what the impost is.
So, so we are predominantly funded by a, um, compulsory, uh,
by a operational levy, which is based on revenue.
So to put that in perspective, for providers with revenue
of under 5 million a year telco services revenue only,
that's $250.
You know, it, it ratchets up.
Um, but at the sort of 20 million mark, you're talking, um,
about $7,000, but you know, it's not huge amounts.
And the 50 million threshold is about 18,000.
So our smallest member has revenue of just over $200,000
and they see value in joining aki.
You know, so it's, it's, it's not a huge impost.
There is of course, um, also a dispute fee,
which kicks in at the time
that it becomes an actual dispute.
It's about 7% of cases,
and that is up to a thousand dollars.
But to be honest, that's only where
the provider has had ample opportunity
to try and solve themselves.
In terms of operational impost,
the only requirements are have a process for dealing
with complaints, engage with us
and make your customers aware of it.
So it's very low. So all of that background is
to say we don't actually believe that the,
the impost is high,
and we think the consumer interest in having compulsory
membership is very high.
So we, um, would strongly suggest
that the committee recommends that
that threshold is actually removed
and if not removed, at least reduced down
to the 10 million threshold, because
otherwise we think a lot
of those 200,000 unserved customers will remain unserved.
That's the threshold point.
And the second is consistency of standards for consumers.
So, um, as you would've seen in our submission, one
of the recommendation or one
of the matters considered in the ministry
for re a regulation review of the sector was whether, um,
consumer codes should essentially
become mandatory across the sector.
And that hasn't been picked up in this piece of legislation,
but we think it's incredibly important that
that is picked up essentially at the moment.
The, um, voluntary code system, I think, uh,
provides, well, in essence, it provides a different set
of protections depending on whether your provider
decides to sign up to them.
And for a consumer that's really difficult
because actually that can't be part
of your diligence process, it just doesn't work.
Um, so we believe that this is not a comment on the quality
of a code, but rather that everyone should be subject
to the same set of codes and the same set of standards.
And so would strongly suggest that
that's actually included in the bill going forward.
Um, I would also note that,
and I'll cover that briefly in a second,
that the current framing of this,
the multiple schemes provision, means
that this problem could get significantly worse
because it doesn't require
that the same standards are applied by all schemes.
So you could have a system where not only the moment you've
got some covered and some not,
but it could be a whole bunch of different standards
for the same thing applied
by a whole bunch of different providers.
And that just seems incredibly problematic for consumers.
Um, and so the, the last point is
around the consist sea of standards for schemes.
So as I've hinted at, um,
the provisions at the moment open it up
to more industry schemes, won't comment on that
decision inherently, but the one concern we do have is
that there isn't actually base requirements for
what schemes must have.
So even really fundamental things like it must be free
to consumers is not actually a requirement.
So anyone could set up a scheme, determine their process,
determine their standards, determine what what,
and how they'll operate.
And actually there's no mechanism by which
that can be controlled,
and that's a really negative outcome.
I mean, things like free to consumers is just a core part
of consumer dispute resolution,
but that's actually not codified.
There is obviously the, um, comm commerce commission's
review mechanism,
but, uh, once again, these aren't standards
that are current enforce,
and I think at least some of those basic standards
and principles need to be included as a basic requirement
for becoming a scheme.
Um, that,
and as I've previously said this, applying the same standard
because if a bunch of schemes start having different
standards for things like broadband marketing
or how you deal with disconnections, you know,
that becomes very problematic and confusing.
And I think it's from a regulatory perspective,
also really negative outcome.
Final comment is on commerce commission oversights,
as we said under the, um, current system,
any new scheme would be subject
to the three yearly review cycle.
Fine. Great. Uh,
I think the gap there is there is no requirement
for ComCom oversight prior to launch.
So by comparison, when this scheme started, um,
ComCom was actively involved in setting up the terms
of reference for the scheme, the customer care code,
which underpins all of our work and,
and kind of had to be happy with the scheme before launch.
The provisions is currently drafted mean that all we have
to all a new provider has
to do is basically email the comm commission saying,
I'm launching a scheme and they could go for up
to three years with an entirely inadequate scheme,
and there's nothing to stop them.
And I think that's a fundamentally negative outcome.
So we would strongly suggest that some kind of provision
for prior to launch oversight
by the Commerce Commission should be included.
So those are my kind of three points.
The threshold, um, adequacy needs to be fixed.
There needs to be greater consistency
and protections for consumers in terms of standards
and requirements of schemes.
And ComCom oversight must start prior
to launch or not after.
Mm-hmm. Thank you for your time. Thank
You. Uh,
any questions members? Yeah, I
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, just on the,
and thank you for taking us through that and
and submission just on the membership questions.
Yes. Um, and it's just to dig into what the uptake is
for those smaller providers on a voluntary basis, if any.
Um, So it's, it's tricky
because there isn't actually even a register
of all providers in scheme.
And with the reselling
and the rebrand white labeling, um, we don't even really,
I can't tell you exactly how many providers are in market.
What I can say is we've had four new retail members join in
the last year, which have all been in the smaller end,
medium to smaller end of the market.
Um, like I said, the one I mentioned, which is revenue
of just over 200, between two
and 300, they've joined in the last 12 months
and have seen x great value from it.
And they don't view this as a problem.
So, um, I would say actually some
of the really small ones have been more willing to go,
oh yeah, this makes sense.
And it's actually some of those ones
that are just a little bit bigger that have gone, oh,
this cost is exorbitant or like, we, we can't carry it.
But you kind of look at it
and go, it's a thousand bucks a year maximum
with very little other operational requirements.
So it, I think historic reticence
as opposed to actually a real barrier to entry
around some of those small ones.
Alright. Thank you so much for your time. Thanks.
Uh, we move on to the next Sumer New Zealand
telecommunications forum.
Anybody in the room? Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Is that Kim Cony Stone? Yes. Yeah.
Thank you so much for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you. Thanks. Uh,
Thank you chair and good morning everyone.
And a little shout out to all the officials at MB
and PCO for their hard work on the bill.
We sometimes forget to say thank you.
Um, you would've seen from our submission
that the TCF is broadly supportive of the bill,
but we do have concerns about some of the provisions
concerning dispute resolution
and the telecommunications development levy, the,
the TDL for short.
Um, there are three things in our submission that I'd like
to highlight this morning.
The first is the $50 million threshold,
um, for joining a scheme.
The second one is a new information gathering power
for the Commerce Commission.
And the third concerns the methodology for the TDL.
So first up, uh, dispute resolution.
Um, we are very supportive of mandatory dispute resolution.
Um, this is already a requirement for TCF members who have
to join the existing industry scheme, um, which is, um,
telecommunications dispute resolution limited.
And you've just heard from Herman, who is the CEO of that.
Um, I think there was a suggestion from an earlier submitter
that the TDR is not an independent scheme.
And I just wanted to, um,
give you some reassurance around that.
You know, while the precursor scheme to TDR was overseen
by the, um, the TCF, the scheme did have full independence,
um, from launch on its decisions, um,
and full commerce commission oversight.
And more recently it's had full legal independence as well.
So moving back, um, to the, the point I did want to make,
which was, uh,
we are really concerned about the $50 million threshold
for joining a scheme
and our warriors that setting the bar
that high could leave quite a few consumers without access
to dispute resolution.
Um, and while the policy intent was
to make dispute resolution available to more consumers,
what we think is that this revenue
threshold could result in even fewer operators being members
than uh, today.
And I think the concern is, is the threshold, sorry,
is going to send a message to industry
that the government thinks dispute resolution isn't
important for all consumers.
Uh, it'll effectively act as a bright line test.
So our view is that dispute resolution should be mandatory
for all service providers.
And contrary to what was suggested in the cabinet papers,
um, we don't think we need a revenue threshold
for competition reasons.
Uh, the New Zealand telco market is already
highly competitive.
There are clear paths to entry for new players
who don't have their own networks.
They can ex they can enter into wholesale arrangements
with existing network providers.
There are very few regulatory barriers
to entry compared to other countries.
And the requirement to join a dispute resolution scheme is
unlikely to be a material barrier from a, um,
compliance cost perspective.
You know, as Herman's just mentioned to you,
the annual charge for companies earning up
to 5 million is only $250.
And then you've got a steep, you know, set of, um, prices.
So they're pretty low when you consider,
um, what you're getting.
And the joining process is really simple.
You know, companies basically just have
to have a complaints policy and a and complaints process.
And really any operator should be,
should be doing that anyway.
Uh, so that is our first point.
50 million, uh, we think it should be zero.
Um, but if you really do have to have, um, a limit,
we would say back to the initial 10 million.
Our second issue, um, is quite small,
but it's very administratively burdensome.
Um, and clause for of the bill, the Commerce Commission, um,
will be given a power to require the supply
of information about revenue.
And so it can determine if folks should be a
member of a scheme.
And this makes total sense if the provider in question isn't
already a member of a scheme.
Um, so our proposal is that
that shouldn't apply if you are
already a member of a scheme.
'cause this is no point in providing revenue information in
slightly different format when you already are a member
of a scheme, I think.
Yeah, that's okay.
Our third issue then, um,
is about the telecommunications development levy.
Uh, the old TDL what we are proposing is
that the bill include a revenue, uh,
a regulation making power to set the methodology
for calculating the levy.
And the reason we are seeking this is
because the bill does contain a regulation making power
to change the amount of the levy and the amount
and the method, uh, connected issues.
You might be aware that the Ministry
for Regulation has recently conducted a review
of telco regulation
and they are likely to propose changes
to the TDL methodology.
Um, and just by way of background, you know,
the current method is really expensive to administer.
It's super complex.
It's not transparent and it's not in line with treasury
and auditor, uh, general guidelines.
So it's, it's due for a good update.
But what we're concerned about is
that if this bill is passed as is,
the government will avail itself
of the new power under regulation
to increase the levy amount,
but it may not have got around to fixing the methodology.
And if the primary legislation needs to be amended
to change the methodology, we are gonna have
to wait quite a long time
to get another legislative vehicle to do that.
Um, so what we think is an elegant solution, uh, would be
to have a regulation making power to change the methodology
of the levy in this bill.
Um, and what could happen is that it could just be drafted
that the current methodology stays in place
until the regulation making power is, um, uh, is used.
And this is actually not very novel.
Um, section 11 of the telco act already has this approach
for the other telco levy,
which is the telecommunications regulatory levy,
where both the amount
and the methodology can be set by regulation.
So we think that's not a, that's not a crazy proposal.
Um, so that brings me to the end of my three points.
Thank you for your time and your attention. Any questions?
Thank you So much. Uh, Ruben Davis.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, and thank you for that.
Taking us through that. So well the 0.6
where you talk about, um, the effect
of bright line test potentially with 50 to 10 million shift.
Um, are there any common themes for the types of consumers
that would fall into that smaller user category?
Like are we talking about regional rural consumers?
Are we talking about lower cost services? Consumers?
I couldn't tell you what the particular concerns are, um,
of consumers for small providers.
That's probably something that, um,
Herman could probably speak to more.
But you know, our point is that, you know, all customers
from time to time get frustrated
with their service providers.
Um, and rural consumers have just as much Right.
You know, to be able to have access
to a dispute resolution as others. Yeah.
So, but but those smaller providers, are they more likely
to be providers who are providing services in those kind of
Geograph? Oh, sorry. I see what
you mean. Like spaces. Yeah.
So a lot of the smaller providers would be
what are called the, the wisps.
Yeah. The wireless internet service providers.
And they're the ones providing really novel and, and,
and solutions to their customers
and they do tend to be smaller.
Yeah. Thank you.
Any other questions? Um,
Yeah, can you just, um, give us an overview
of the architecture that we're talking about here yourselves
and, uh, TDR?
'cause we're talking about levies and so on at the moment
and, um, regulating them.
So can you tell us how that works,
particularly in governance?
The architecture for Yeah, For yourselves and for TDR.
Unfortunately I don't work for TDRI know that. Yeah.
So I really can't, unfortunately I can't sort of talk
to the, the architecture of TDR.
Okay. And yourselves, Beg your pardon.
And yourselves. I'm looking at it now.
Yeah. So the, the telecommunications forum. Yeah.
Um, so we're in the industry body
and we also have a self-regulatory function.
Um, so we create, um, codes of practice which members,
um, abide by.
Uh, some of those are voluntary codes, some that, um,
are required codes.
Probably the most relevant one
for dispute resolution is we have a customer care code, um,
which has minimum requirements
and we, um, are required to know regularly update those.
Yeah. Sorry,
I misunderstood your question this time around.
Alright, great. Thank you so much for your submission.
Thanks everyone. So members we stay in public session, uh,
we just have change of advisors.
Uh, we moving on to the next bill Promise,
promoting competition and other matters.
Thank you so much.
And our first submitter is online.
Hi. Good. Good morning. Morning.
This is, uh, Pete Baes from, uh, broadband
and internet New Zealand submitting. Oh, hello
Pete. Thank you so much.
Uh, we have 10 minutes with you.
Thank you for your submission. Sure.
Okay, thank you very much.
Hey, um, uh, so, um, we're, we're,
we appreciate the opportunity you've, um, given to us
to provide feedback to on the commerce, uh,
promoting competition
and other matters amendment bill as a small
and emerging startup offering communication services.
So I'm just going back to the previous presenters
where they say, you know, we,
we are a small player in the telecommunications industry,
so we we're not aware,
but we do have spectrum a access rights as part
of our services that we can offer.
So as a small and emerging startup
offering communication services,
we recognize the important role,
a robust competition framework plays in supporting New
Zealand's long-term economic resilience, innovation,
and enriching consumer choices.
Our submission is reflective
of our experience in the telecommunications sector within
New Zealand, uh,
which is continuously undergoing short term transf
transformations, as well
as long-lasting impacts on the future of the industry
that may be irreversible, if not addressed, managed,
or implemented correctly on the onset as part of this bill.
So moving on
and particularly on some of the important points
that we wanna address.
Um, and the first one is really around predatory pricing.
Um, we do welcome the government's efforts
to strengthening the Comm Act
by introducing the new predatory pricing rules.
However, we are concerned that the current definition
of the average variable cost
and the average avoidable cost is too broad
and open to interpretation as drafted.
It does not ensure prices pricing is assessed on a,
like, for like basis and does not fully reflect the
realities of New Zealand's telecommunications market
for consumers, uh, end user consumers.
Some of the key points that we wanna highlight
as a weakness on that predatory pricing is really
around the, like for like on product technology
where different technologies, whether it be Fiverr,
fixed wireless access cellular, they can be diluted
to compare a average price.
And what they will do is they basically trade
off one versus the other.
And this is something that we've seen as part
of our experience as we are trying
to launch our pilot services as Fiverr.
Some of the larger operators in the industry are basically
not only undercutting,
but they're actually offering product that are
below the wholesale pricing.
Um, so realistically, you know, we do not have the,
the grounds to compete fairly and equally within that
because of that dilution of the technology.
The other part that we wanna address is the different plans
and tiers of plans that are being offered with the,
within the telecommunications industry,
within the same technology are also being diluted.
And this predatory pricing doesn't effectively address that,
where I could have a smaller, uh, speed plan
at a very low margin,
and yet the product can still be undercut
and the the average can be put across higher speed plans.
So the, the higher plans could be charged
with higher margins, whereas the low ones are with lower
or in some cases even negative margins.
So realistically, you know, tier plans need
to be compared on a, like, for like basis as well.
The third issue about the predatory pricing is really about
how bundles are being combined as part of a product offering
where other bundles like electric, um,
media services are all being bundled together
and one of those bundle components are being traded off, um,
under a discounted, a heavily discounted offering, uh,
whereas others may be highly, uh, charged as well.
So this is why we think
that the predatory pricing is not correctly set up and is,
and without such, um, prescribed methods for protections,
then the predatory pricing framework may not be effectively
exercised allowing service providers to sell
specific products below their actual economic cost was
appearing compliant with the average, um, uh, variable
and average, um, accounting cost, um,
when averaging across their whole portfolio
of products and services.
Um, we are also of the strong opinion
that the exclusionary purpose under section 36 C of the, uh,
this bill should also be extended to include influencers.
An example being comparison and best deal websites, uh,
and those types of organizations
and platforms that are responsible for shaping
and influencing consumer choices and market outcomes.
These influencers effectively act as gatekeepers
and can significantly affect fair and equal competition.
So this is where we've, we've tried to go onto
platform providers like these and we've had our products
and price our products blocked from those prices,
or not fairly qually represented, which has resulted in our,
you know, ability to, um, break even on our investments
to be extended double the amount that we expected.
So for, for our example, we were expecting to break even
after 13 months of operating, but
because these compare platforms did not allow us
to advertise our products,
and they were primarily on unfair basis that our
breakeven point was extended out to three years.
So they need to be included as part of that, um, group
of people who should be assessed
and as part of that exclusionary purposes as well.
Moving on to the next point,
which is about the notifiable conduct concerns,
we do not support the proposed statutory notification regime
for notable conduct as well as the whole of section 65,
um, in its current form.
Um, so really we're in our submission,
we're addressing the section 65 E to Q.
Um, this regime grant significant discretionary powers
to executives and the commission which could undermine fair
transparency, equal access and pro competitive collaboration
and load and long-term accountability.
This creates a system in which eligibility
and scope can shift based on policy rhetoric preferences,
unlimited procedural protections for effective parties.
The commission's ability to object, uh, under section, um,
60 5K and
to impose conditions under section 65 p is far
overreaching in our opinion, uh,
in practice enabling the commission to exclude participants
to shape collaboration in ways that markets affect a
a mark in the way that mark materially affect competition
or benefit specific participants in relation
to this bill also needs to be extended, needs
to extend the appeals process where such decisions do
such decision to be bought by the effective party
to the high court on the question of law
to be extended from the current 20 days
to match a maximum period of 10 years.
So we, we believe that it needs to be extended.
Um, and and that 10 years is the, the blockage period
that's been identified within the, the bill itself.
Um, dis extending this extended duration makes the
government more accountable for
any unlawful unfair conditions
where these notification conditions are applied, um,
with a commission decision where commission decisions
under the notification conduct regime, um,
that result in actual
or reasonable foreseeable loss to the affected parties
as a result of wrongful
and unfair decisions that were non objectable and
or later rescinded.
So this is part of what's within the policy itself
or the bill and unfairly disadvantaged a party.
Um, then there should be pre a precise mechanism for
restitution on which o of such occurrences
and substantial compensation, uh,
or at least accessible pathway for redress
to the person affected for, for or
or their direct beneficiaries.
So basically what we're saying is, you know, if
a decision is rescinded to block a particular party,
then really there should be a mechanism for compensation
that without such compensation the commission may act
with impunity or face short term limited consequences,
which should be discouraged.
One of the things that's really important about New
Zealand's co competitive environment is
that if you compare it with other, uh, jurisdictions
around the world, whether it be Australia, the uk,
Singapore, that they have probably better, uh, protections
for companies and competition than New Zealand does.
You know, you take the aid Triple C in in Australia
for competition and anti-competitive behaviors.
There are mechanisms within that that not only protect the
companies, the companies in a fair competitive environment,
but they also support the individual companies
to actually take action against such events.
Whereas in New Zealand,
those same protections don't actually fit into play.
And one of the, the things with that whole section 65 is
it promotes what they call,
Sorry to interrupt, the time
for your submission is coming to an end.
Is there a concluding remark that you want to make?
Yeah, sure. So look, I just wanna say one yeah,
Yeah. A few seconds. Thank
You. So we,
we do want to see better protections put in play,
but we also wanted to see better, um, mechanisms
for people like ourselves, companies like ourselves
to compete in the environment.
We believe that the current bill in its form is,
um, anti-competitive.
We don't believe that it should be passed in, into,
uh, into law. Um,
Alright, so we'll have to finish it there.
Sorry Pete, thank you so much for your contribution.
Okay, thank you.
Uh, next we have on Zoom again. Oh, yes, they are there.
Thank you so much. Um, very prompt.
Uh, we have 10 minutes with you.
Uh, this includes, um,
any questions from members if there is any
time left. Thank you so much.
Great. Thank you Dr. Palmer.
And, um, good morning committee members.
Uh, thanks very much for the opportunity to present today.
Uh, my name is Glen Schoen.
I'm a partner here in the competition department at GAL G.
Uh, this is Penny Paley, a special council on my team
and Emma Quigley, a senior associate, my name.
Um, look, we, um, really happy
that the parliament's having a look at the Commerce Act.
Um, there are a number of really positive developments in
the proposed changes.
Uh, we've, uh, lodged a written submission.
We don't intend to go through all of that today,
but just suffice to say we're very supportive in particular
of behavioral undertakings, which is long overdue.
Um, and, and will put us back into line
with other jurisdictions.
And also the increased protection on, uh,
confidential information, um, which can be a real bugbear
for, uh, for people dealing
with the the Commerce Commission.
Um, so in the limited time, we just wanted
to cover three main points.
Um, I'd like to cover, uh, an issue that's not in the, uh,
in the bill, which is related to the burden of proof
for, uh, merging parties.
Uh, and then if we have time, penny,
we'll talk briefly about predatory pricing
and Emma will talk about the proposed removal of section 46.
Um, so just moving on to burden of proof.
So one thing that we've advocated for
that hasn't appeared in the bill is to address, uh,
new Zealand's burden of proof in its merger control regime.
The current settings set a much higher burden of proof
for a merger applicant to prove, uh, compared
to all other sort of comparable jurisdictions.
Um, so section 66 3 of the ACT provides
that the Commerce Commission will grant grant clearance if
it is satisfied that the acquisition will not have
or would not be likely to have the effect
of substantially lessening competition in a market.
The courts and the commission have interpreted this over
time to require proof, uh,
that a transaction will not
substantially less than competition.
That goes well beyond the balance of probabilities burden
that you would see in almost any other sort of aspect
of the judicial or, or, um, uh, or regulatory processes.
Uh, and that can actually have a result in decisions
that lean towards prohibition, even
where there's an inability to actually prove the likelihood
of anti-competitive effects.
We think this is inappropriate
because mergers really are a, a normal market response.
They create efficiencies, um, they deliver scale
and support innovation, um, which is, are really things
that our economy is, is desperately crying out for.
So we don't think that merge control should start from the
presumption that mergers are anti-competitive.
As I mentioned, this does put us out of line,
our current burden of proof regime with our peers.
Um, Australia's longstanding position is
that mergers are not presumed
to substantial less some competition, uh,
and is the regulator that bears the
burden of proving otherwise.
And actually, when Australia recently looked at its merger
control regime, which resulted in the mandatory merger
control regime that's just come into force, um, they
specifically considered this concept
of whether they should change the burden of proof
to put their burden of proof, uh, on the applicant to, um,
to demonstrate that there was no real chance
of a substantial less of competition.
The competition task force, um, rejected that they found
that doing so would amount to a presumptive ban on mergers.
They said it would bias US outcomes towards prohibition
without the regulator having to prove its case
and it would dampen business dynamicism and capital flows.
Uh, and these implications really hit emerging
and sectors the hardest.
Um, so these are the exact risks that New Zealand continues
to face if we maintain the current burden
of proof rules that we have.
I I think this becomes even more stark when you look at some
of the proposed changes in the bill in particular, um,
the rules around entrenchment of market power, um,
resulting in a substantial lessening of competition.
When you are considering these sort of entrenchment
of market power type cases, you're often looking at a,
a small nascent potential competitor, uh,
that's being acquired and looking as
to whether in in the future absent the merger,
it would potentially grow into a large
and significant competitor to, to the acquiring entity.
This is an inherently difficult thing to prove one way
or another in a forward looking case like this.
But putting the burden of proof on the applicant
to remove any real doubt, um, that, that, uh,
that competitor might grow into a, into a major competitor
and therefore substantially increased competition,
is an extremely high hurdle to, to meet.
And sometimes it'll be impossible.
And in international cases
where the commission is looking at a transaction alongside
its international peers, that could result in a,
in a different decision being made in New Zealand compared
to Australia, the US, eu,
and the uk, which would, would not be a great, uh, outcome.
And we have seen that in,
in other cases in the past
in slightly different circumstances.
So sort of our main, uh,
our main bug bear really is we think this is a great
opportunity to look at this burden of proof point, um, and,
and update it
to bring us into line with international peers.
And just any questions on that penny?
Um, so I think, I'm pretty sure pricing,
we have real concerns that making below cost pricing
and automatic breach without any need to show recoupment
or anti-competitive purpose would act as a deterrent
to genuine competitive and low pricing.
Um, ultimately harming consumers.
We assume you're gonna hear a lot about predatory pricing
across the day,
and there's lots that we could say about the test
and how it's gonna put us out of step internationally,
but we thought it might be helpful in
the limited time that we have.
Just to outline a, a real world hypothetical example of
how we think this could, um, come to bear.
So imagine a bus company, um, that operates across Auckland.
It might make the majority of its revenue at each end
of the day during rush hour,
but in the middle of the day when there's not
as many people riding the bus,
it still has the same fixed costs that it had
to run those services at the start and the end of the day.
But it doesn't have the same throughput.
So it might be running those services below cost.
Now we can argue the appropriate timeframe to,
to determine when the below cost calculation should be made,
but the risk of a per se breach
might be enough for that bus company.
When it can't, it doesn't have any ability
to say we don't have an anti-competitive purpose.
We have no prospect of recouping that below cost pricing,
but still we have a per se breach potentially on our hands.
And that might mean that bus company, given the risk
of breaching the law, decides to either up the price
during the middle of the day
or stop offering those services altogether.
We don't think either of those outcomes would be
really good for consumers.
Thanks, penny. And the final point we wanted
to make today was just to reiterate our view that section 46
of the Commerce Act should not be repealed.
So section 46 sends a very clear, simple
and certain message, which is that part two
of the Commerce Act does not apply
to arrangements giving rise to the sale
or acquisition of a business.
The crux of our concern is that
repealing this provision will have unintended consequences.
So there's two key reasons for that.
The first being that it will introduce in our view
what we'd say is considerable uncertainty.
Uh, the most obvious example here is
that merging parties would, um, as a result of this change,
be exposed to potential cartel liability simply
by entering into an arrangement
to buy a business, buy or sell a business.
Um, and then also merges, which do not have the effect,
the effect of substantial lessening competition could
nevertheless be considered to breach section 27
of the act if one
or more of the merging parties this evidence
that they might have an anti-competitive purpose,
which is a fundamental change to the current position.
And then final second point on this was just
that section 83 6 of the Commerce Act, which is
what it is referred to in the explanatory notes on the bill,
does not render section 46 unnecessary.
Um, section 83 6 only protects merging parties against
potential pecuniary liability for the breach of section part
or part two and part three of the Commerce Act.
There's many other potential consequences of a breach
of the Commerce Act and the most obvious example there is
potential criminal liability for cartel conduct.
So in summary, section 46 has an important role
and should not be appealed.
So that, that was our main point.
So we're more than happy to take any questions
or comments from the committee.
Yeah. Um, there is, um, Dr. David Wilson Christian. Yeah,
Thank you very much for that. Um,
a very substantive submission. So enjoyed that.
Um, the burden of proof, uh, around, uh, merger
and your comment that it's going to affect emerging
and innovative businesses if you disallow this.
And I fully understand that kind of, um, that kind of,
we want to avoid that we want to encourage emerging
and innovative businesses.
Absolutely. However, um, we've got a situation right now
where we've got a, a structural oligopoly in the banking
system and we are trying to increase competitions.
And so far the inquiries had that positive effect.
However, what we're seeing already emerging is that those,
uh, fintechs that we're expecting
to provide more competition are starting
to be bought by the banks.
So can you comment on that?
Because in the public interest, we actually need to ensure
that competition remains.
Yeah, I mean, you still have to determine whether
or not absent that transaction that FinTech would,
would grow to be a material competitor to, um,
uh, to the main banks.
If there's good evidence that that would be the case,
then under the current rules, um, it would be
for the commission to say that they are,
they think there's a, a good likelihood that
that would substantially lessen competition.
That what we are asking for is just to remove the, the world
where they say, well actually we've just really got no idea,
but we couldn't exclude a chance that it might happen and
therefore you get a potentially beneficial merger, um,
that gets disallowed.
And the reason it could be potentially beneficial is
that could actually bring a lot more
capital to the, the new startup.
It could introduce that to a whole lot of new customers.
So while, um, it, you know, you could argue
that in the absence of that transaction,
that might be a big competitor actually
with the transaction, that bank becomes much more
competitive against the other banks.
The services improved for customers
and actually consumer outcomes are are better.
Um, so what we're really asking for is a kind
of a living level playing field of, of weighing it up, um,
sort of pros and cons on the balance
of probability rather than setting this extremely high
standard for for merger applicants to, to meet.
And essentially you're saying, so
We don't have time for any more questions,
so we'll have to finish it there.
Yep. Thank you so much for your submission.
Thanks. Thank you. Thanks committee.
Thank You all. Have a good day. Thank you.
Next we have, uh, Henderson.
Hello. Good morning, Sarah. Uh, we have 10 minutes with you.
Uh, we have Antonio as well.
Uh, we have 10 minutes with you
and this includes, um, anytime for questions. Thank you.
Got it. Jeff and members of the committee,
and thank you for, uh, engaging, uh, with the, you know,
the competition community in relation
to this really important, uh, initiative.
Um, I think it might be helpful to start
with a brief introduction.
So my name's Sarah Keen, I'm a partner with Henderson.
Um, I've had the privilege to assist some of the largest US
and Australian companies on competition law
for over 30 years here and in Europe.
Uh, you'll find over 35 judgements.
I've acted on the other side of the Commerce Commission in
leading cartel and merger cases, uh,
and uh, led the Russ McVay trust practice
for over a decade practice
of barrister now have the privilege
to lead the team at we Henderson
and we have a globally recognized technology practice
and strength in that area in particular, if
that's of interest to the committee.
Um, and we Henderson, I've been joined by Antonia Hor, who
before joining us held the position
of general manager competition
and consumer at the Commerce Commission.
Uh, and before that was in senior roles
and equivalent regulator, uh,
to the commission in the uk the CMA.
And just as a sort of opening, uh, comment,
two things that our experience working
with these clients has taught us, both within the regulator
and outside, is that competition is
probably more than any other area of law,
a highly integrated and specialized enforcement environment.
And it's integrated across all of the jurisdictions
where the antitrust practices, um,
and regulators, uh, uh, work together
cooperatively to, um, enforce what is actually
very similar laws all around the world.
Um, and the other thing that it's taught us is
that large companies, both global
and local, vote with their feet.
They choose where to dedicate capital and resources
and they don't have to engage
with New Zealand, many of them.
And if we make it hard, they just won't.
And New Zealanders I fear or miss out
and I've seen examples of that in the past
where New Zealand's laws have been bespoke, unique,
uncomfortable, and New Zealand's just too smaller
jurisdiction for them to then invest
and, um, deliver New Zealand
as the benefit of that innovation.
So, um, the opening request of the committee is
to think very carefully about any departure from
what are regarded as international antitrust norms.
Um, so from our perspective,
the bill contains some very useful amendments
to New Zealand's competition regime.
Um, in particular the change proposed
to the Official Information Act, uh,
and the ability to accept behavioral
undertakings in merger cases.
These two things will actually bring New Zealand better
aligned to international best practice.
We are however concerned that there are changes that create
unnecessary additional layers of regulation
and move New Zealand's competition law away from the global
enforcement and merger control trends.
Um, and um, that is particularly at the moment, um,
with the, um, you know,
with the political environment in the UK
and the us we are seeing a real trend towards
pragmatism from regulators to facilitate business growth.
And our real concern with a number of these reforms is
that they do the opposite.
They make it more cumbersome,
they make it more New Zealand bespoke,
they make it more difficult to engage, uh, in New Zealand
and particularly for foreign investors that will act
as a disincentive to engage.
Um, so particularly also for global
and, uh, trans tasman businesses, divergence
and competition laws inefficient and costly.
And the bill proposes divergence from Australia
in the substantive SLC test,
that substantial less competition test
and the predatory pricing law
where behavioral undertakings can be accepted.
Um, the scope and timing of clearance notification regimes,
harmonization of competition law
for efficient trans Tasman markets has long been a focus
and, um, a good way to seek productivity gains.
And we endorse that as an overriding, um, focus.
So I'll briefly touch on a couple of key submissions,
but of course you will have seen that we had a
a, a longer submission.
Um, the first thing I wanna say is we support the changes
to exempt the provision
of confidential information from the OIA regime.
I have direct experience of international companies
that are reporting anti-competitive behavior in a whole lot
of jurisdictions around the world,
and they see New Zealand as an outlier,
and so they don't want to engage with the regulator
to provide evidence of anti-competitive behavior
because they do not believe
that their information can be protected.
And, um, it's really important to correct this problem.
We've been asking for this for a while
and we're really pleased to see, um,
that this bill does envisage making those changes
and, um, fully endorse that.
Um, we, uh, also,
um, do not support the broadening
of the substantial lessing competition test.
Um, the reason we say that is
because wherever we have seen changes made
to the law, even when those changes, uh, sort of notionally
and conceptually replicating
what you would always already think the law was, um,
the courts then try to find a, um, they, they try
to find a reason
that Parliament would've implemented a change.
And so they try to give meaning to the change, uh, and,
and effectively it becomes a dog's breakfast, uh,
from an international and conceptual perspective.
Um, and the predatory pricing proposals sit very
much in this camp.
Um, basically the proposal that is in front of us
to have this sort of, um, hard set of rules
around predatory pricing, very similar
to the Birdsville amendments that about a, well it was five,
10 years ago in Australia, were internationally ridiculed
by the global competition community
because a couple of senators had thought it was a good idea
and they wrote it in a back
of an envelope in a pub in Birdsville in Australia.
And then it got passed into law. A CCC never enforced it.
Ultimately it was dropped.
And it would be a real pity if New Zealand brought itself
into international distribute by effectively just copying,
um, the Birdsville mistake.
Uh, it would just, uh, be a real pity.
Uh, so, um, we would not support it
and we don't think there's any justification for it.
I think Bel Gly articulated, uh, that,
uh, pretty well as well.
Uh, and we endorse the, the comments
that you've just received from Ali, all
of them were very sensible, uh, discussions and proposals.
Um, uh, so, uh, Antonia,
I will hand over now to you for the, um,
the balance of our commentary.
Um, hello. Thank you for the opportunity to talk, um,
about some key things, um, that of interest
to us and our clients.
Um, so firstly, um, just wanna put on record that we, um,
don't think the introduction
of performance injunction powers in the format set
out in the bill are necessary.
Um, they do risk, um,
putting the high court in an ongoing supervisory rollover
commercial conduct.
Um, also amendments were made to the Commerce Act, um, uh,
one of, uh, the many, uh, recent sets of amendments, um,
to bring enforceable undertakings, um, into the statute.
These, um, would do the same thing, um,
and have already been used.
So at this stage, um, there is no, no need, um, for
that additional power.
And if it is introduced,
it must have clear statutory limits on duration
and scope so that additional regulatory powers are a tool
of last resort, not a tool for permanent market management.
Um, very briefly changes to the merger regime.
Um, as with Ali, we really support the introduction
of behavioral undertakings.
This is something that in my experience both the business
community and much of the commission has supported
for a long time to bring New Zealand into align
with international norms.
Um, just a drafting point here
that I think is very important.
Uh, for many years the commission has struggled to be able
to accept undertakings that are offered to fix mergers, um,
in Australia or globally, um,
and has had a number of workarounds
or issues with not being able to accept those.
Um, the drafting in this bill sets a high threshold
for accepting behavioral undertakings outside
of international norms, um,
and doesn't allow the court
to impose such undertakings without those two
specific drafting changes.
The same issue will continue, so we urge the committee
to take a close look at that piece.
Um, and then finally, in relation
to merger control more generally, um, there are a lot
of changes to the bill, um,
and some are welcome to bring enhanced timeliness
and decision transparency.
Um, overall the regime is now looking like a,
a significant international outlier, um,
alongside Singapore and the uk.
It's the only major voluntary regime
and it's a mix of voluntary and compulsory now.
So we recommend, um, adopting a statutory day minimis regime
for merger control with a UK safe harbor threshold, um,
to exempt small or low significance transactions.
Um, New Zealand now sits as a regime, um,
that is a significant international outlier in not having
any clarity on the types of very tiny transactions
that won't, um, result in scrutiny.
Having a call in power in the absence of some sort
of di minimis regime
and a with a compulsory obligation
to file is just confusing in this regard.
Um, so those are the key points that we have. Um, so yeah,
We'll have to end your submission here.
Thank you so much to both.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Um, next we have Edward Willis.
Uh, again, z uh, please available.
Hello Edward.
Good morning. Good morning.
We have five minutes with you. Thank you so much.
Sure thing. Um, I won't go
through my submission in detail, in fact,
I'll take most of it as read.
Can I just start by saying,
competition law is incredibly complex, in fact, notoriously
so, so I just want to acknowledge the government, um,
being willing to take this on.
Um, while I don't think I agree with everything
that's being proposed here, the fact that we are trying
to calibrate our competition law system is,
is fundamentally important.
So I think that deserves to be acknowledged.
Um, the main point from my submission
that I'm gonna talk on is behavioral undertakings.
You've just heard two submissions from big law firms, um,
supporting behavioral undertakings rather breathlessly.
I think, um, I don't think it's a good idea.
Uh, I, i I, I think it's probably the easiest thing
to do is to say it this way.
Um, it's a bit like watching a game of rugby
and then saying, man, wouldn't that be a lot,
a lot better game if they had a round ball?
And oh, by the way, like in Europe,
they play a game with the round ball.
So we are, we're adopting international
best practice when we do that.
That's not really what's going on here.
Um, when we are thinking about merger control,
we are very specifically thinking
about the market structure.
We don't want ongoing supervision of particular companies.
We want to know that the structure is competitive
or at least as competitive as it can be.
And so structural undertakings,
which are essentially divestments help us do that
and are a very useful tool.
Behavioral undertakings don't add anything
and they are fundamentally inapt.
They are a solution looking for a problem.
I highly recommend to the committee
that they don't go forward with behavioral undertakings.
Uh, just one final point I will mention
before I, I open myself up for questions.
Um, and that's something that Glen raised in his
submission around the burden of proof.
Um, I think flipping the onus of the burden of proof in um,
merger cases in some circumstances could be really useful.
And I think it's something the
committee should really consider.
I don't quite have the same view
of view of it that Glen does.
Um, for me it's a process point.
Um, I think we'd get faster decisions
or we would at least incentivize the commission
to make faster decisions, um, if there was
that reverse owner sometimes.
So they had the commission had to actively object
to something rather than just saying, well, you need
to prove to us that this is okay.
Um, the commerce commission should not be taking more than
six weeks to try
and understand the tofu manufacturing market.
Frankly, it's embarrassing.
The commission can move faster than that.
Um, complex big picture mergers, absolutely take your time.
Um, but there's small bean stuff
that the commission just drags out and drags out
and drags out, and it's those small businesses
that can't afford the time to wait.
They want the merger to go through usually so
that someone who's been working for 40 years
and a business can cash out and enjoy their retirement.
Um, I'll leave it at that and I'm happy
to take any questions from the committee.
That's good. Thank you. Um, Marcos, any questions?
Uh, it looks like there are no questions.
Uh, a very comprehensive submission.
Thank you so much Edward, Edward submission.
I get it done. Thank you so much. Thank you,
Byebye.
Um, next we have has little limited
Submission I've ever done.
There are Dan.
Hello. Can you hear me?
Oh, yes, Melanie, thank you so much.
We can hear you, but we can't see you.
But that's up to you if you want to turn your camera on
or if you just wish to speak to us. Oh,
Let's see. Let's see if
I can click the right
buttons and it starts working. Here we
Go. Oh, yes, we can see
you now. That's great. Thank you.
Uh, you have 10 minutes. Thank you. Excellent.
Thanks. Thanks very much. Um, really like to thank you
for the opportunity, um, to appear before you today.
Um, so I'm Mel Brooks and I lead our haslet team.
Um, I'm here rep representing us as a family business.
Uh, we are not law law experts.
Uh, we were founded back in 2008, um, by people
who saw a genuine gap in the market
and believed there should be room in New Zealand
for new independent entrants, prepared to work hard,
take risks and serve our customers well.
Um, we didn't start with scale market power
or capital reserves for that matter.
Um, um, but we did start with a lot of experience,
strong eth ethic, um, work ethic,
and um, really looking to build something
that was sustainable for the long term.
And we are not dissimilar to lots of kiwi businesses.
And, um, we were built from the ground up
and we were competing with established players
who already benefited from their size,
that whole incumbency piece
that they get in the market reach.
So we were able to enter the market, um, not, not
because it was there, 'cause the
regulatory settings allowed it.
So it's those early experiences that I'm kind of,
I'm drawing on today.
'cause we've really grown our business.
Um, we have now got livestock, agronomy, insurance,
broking procurement, and a centralized admin team.
We excel in highly competitive markets.
Um, one of our values is, um, Maha our io,
which is Tough Business, powerful Harmony,
which is all about the way we operate in our business.
So we believe the Commerce Act, um,
not only should address the misuse of market power,
but actively consider the real world barriers faced
by new entrants and growing firms
because there are barriers to market
that we are experiencing at the moment.
So, um, as I said earlier on,
I'm not an expert in competition law.
It's, it's all about our lived experience.
So I'm gonna, I'm gonna do my best to kind of share
what we are experiencing at the moment.
So, um, for livestock, our livestock trading part
of our business, um, there's plenty of different ways
that people sell livestock.
There's private sale, there's auction on-farm sales, online,
direct market, or slaughter and sale yards.
There's a growing variety of ways that livestock are traded,
but the traditional way of selling is at Saley yards.
Um, Saley Yards are a centralized selling point.
That's where our communities come together.
Market prices determine the sales get transaction.
Um, sale yards in New Zealand are privately owned
and if you own a sale yard, you get the opportunity
to restrict access.
Um, and,
and it puts the owners
of those sale yards in a dominant position.
The North island and south Island markets are quite
different, and the majority
of the sale yards in the north island are owned
by livestock brokering companies
and the South island it's typically owned by,
they're typically owned by farmers and brokering companies,
but access isn't restricted, um,
as the select committee will be aware.
The regulation of parties
with market power was changed back in 2023
with the new wording of Section 36, um,
of the comments, comments act.
But, um, and there was Commerce Commission guidance is my
understanding, um, regarding the changes to section 36,
but it didn't make any reference to, to access
to essential infrastructure, um,
which I would've thought would've been covered.
Um, because the access
to essential infrastructure not only is bricks and water,
but I actually think like online selling channels will
become more and more relevant as we continue to evolve.
We are really pleased to see this targeted review.
Um, and,
but, um, unfortunately, the newly proposed bill, um,
there's, there is still, it doesn't address, um,
the barriers to entry and industry codes haven't eventuated.
Um, so in the north island, uh,
or actually in the south island where we have access
to Saley yards, lots of sale yards, we've got access to, um,
over the last 18 years in Central Canterbury,
we've increased our market share to,
we sell approximately half
of all livestock in the Central Canterbury region.
And I can understand why
North Island operators wouldn't want
to welcome us into their sale yards.
Um, and in fact, in the south island,
we welcomed a new operator into the temuka
sale yards this week.
You know, it's, it's something that we, we really value.
We think competition in sale yards
makes everyone more powerful.
It makes the, um, customers get a better experience.
And, um, we, we really encourage it.
Um, but we've tried
and we continue to try to get access
to sale yards in the north island, um, and,
and we continue to be blocked.
Um, not having that access, uh, affects our ability
to scale in the north island.
Um, on-farm sales are phenomenal.
I think they give the farmers a huge amount
of benefit on multiple levels,
but there's some farmers who are more traditional
or they have smaller runs of stocks, lines of stock,
and they insist on selling at the sale yards,
and we don't have an option to sell for those.
Um, we also don't have an option to employ agents
who only wish to sell at sale yards
because they only are able to be employed
by people have access to those saley yards.
So the other livestock broken companies, um, so many
of the larger operators in the north island have been
closing sale yards because they're expensive to run
and maintain, um, and,
and meeting their regulatory requirements.
And we've got massive overcapacity issues.
So every yard except maybe fielding, um,
could sell more stock.
Um, there's plenty of yards,
we just don't have access to them.
Um, we looked at building our own yards.
The reality is the, the sale yards
that are there at the moment, were built under very
different regulatory regimes.
And so consenting at the moment would be prohibitive.
And also it just feels, it feels strange
to be building a new yard when we have such an oversupply
and over capacity.
So we believe that industry codes, um,
which could manage the access,
would make material difference
and improve the access to our markets.
It would reduce barriers and improve competition.
I really encourage you to incorporate industry codes into,
um, into the review.
Thank you.
That's good. Um, no questions.
Uh, it looks like there are no questions. This one.
Oh, there is a question. Yeah. From Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you, Melanie. Um,
I heard you talk a little bit about the structure
of the differences, uh, in the ownership of the sale yards.
Could you explain that a little bit again,
and that actually tell us how it works
and in terms of what you are trying to achieve?
So in, in the South island, the ownership of, I mean, all
of the Saley yards are held privately.
Some overseas countries, they're public ownership,
but all of the Saley yards in
New Zealand are privately held.
And in the south island, that's typically by farmers
who own those Saley yards.
And so they are really, they encourage lots of throughput.
They want as many operators there as possible
because it increases the, the, the volumes, which means
that share the share of those overhead costs.
In the North island, the livestock
companies typically own the sale yards.
Topo is owned, um, by farmers with some livestock companies.
But yeah, that, that's probably an exception.
And so because of that ownership, the livestock companies
that own the sale yards prohibit people
who aren't an owner from selling at those yards.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Oh, thank you for the time. I appreciate it. Good luck.
Thank you. Um, next we have John Land.
Hello, John. Thank you for your submission.
Uh, we have five minutes with you. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you so much.
Um, I really just want to talk to one point,
and that is the repeal of
or proposed repeal of section 46, which is a point
that was not consulted on by member mb.
So it may not have, um,
it may have snuck into the bill perhaps
without full consideration.
Now, since 1986, since the Commiss Act was first introduced,
business acquisitions, mergers have been tested on
whether they have anti-competitive effect.
That's all. If, if they,
if they don't have an anti-competitive effect,
then they can, they can go ahead.
It's the same in Australia, and businesses need certainty.
Um, and if they, they know
and get advice that there's no anti actual,
anti-competitive effect, they can go ahead with the merger,
and the merger won't be at risk of being unwell.
That's a good thing. Mergers help drive the economy.
Um, business assets get into the hands
of those people who value the most.
The problem with repealing section 46 is it makes business
acquisitions not just subject to section 47,
which has a anti-competitive effect test,
but also for the first time subject to section 27.
And section 27 includes a purpose test.
So what that means is that merges
with no anti-competitive effect can for the first time,
be challenged and set aside,
even though they have no anti-competitive effect.
Just because there's some ill worded internal memo
on the files of one of the merger parties.
They can be challenged
and potentially set aside under section 27, subsection four.
That's not good policy,
and it's not good for our economic recovery.
So, um, my very strong submission is that the repeal
of section 46, which as I've said was not consulted on
by EMB, should not go ahead, should not proceed.
Um, I'll leave the other points in my written submission,
which for consideration by, by, by the committee,
there isn't time to, to cover all those points.
Um, I, I would note that I agree
with Ed Willis on behavioral undertakings.
They're not a good idea.
Um, I don't necessarily agree with the comments
of others about predatory pricing.
Those are not based on the birds full Australian proposal.
They're based on the EU guidelines from, um, 2024.
But, um, I won't speak to those points in any more detail.
Um, if the committee has any questions for me, I'm,
um, happy to take them.
Thank you so much, uh, members, any questions for John?
Um, no. It looks like there are no questions.
Thank you so much, John, for your submission. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have, uh, max Marshall, um,
in person, I believe.
Thank you, max for your submission.
Hi, uh, we have five minutes and you know how it works.
Thank you. Beautiful.
Um, uh, good morning.
I'm madam speaker, members of the panel.
Uh, what I'm seeking is
certainty and control
and trust in terms of our relationship with the airline tra
with airline, with airline travel.
The travel industry is, is much a tangible face
of the go global marketplace As financial markets,
our social cohesion is determined by our response to how we
redefine our identity against this marketplace.
Uh, we shouldn't submerge ourselves with it.
As Bruce Jesson would state,
what has developed over the past 70 years in the airline
industry has strayed
so incredibly far from its original purpose
to being unrecognizable, almost a model
where you are once charged mile per distance.
So if you thought about the primary goal getting passengers
from point to A to point B in terms of the pricing model,
they're worlds apart.
I'm not arguing that the strategies
inside the, inside the air.
Um, I argue that the strategies inside the airline
that the airlines use to generate profit is unfair.
I'm not being anti-business,
but it seems unequitable,
I mentioned the loyalty, loyalty system
and how airlines have become virtual banks,
but this is a sidebar.
None of this has anything to do with the business of flying.
Travel class has some effect on plus
mechanism and economics.
Premium classes often pay
for the flight itself.
I would like to ask, is this fair to answer this question?
I have another question. Why far fly premium
for many people, it comes down to a third party
who is pa paying something to think about?
What I think it does is distort the economics.
A market geared towards maximization
or segment maximization will create other effects.
The market mechanism produces transactional costs,
which broadly society
and general beers, I argue,
regional areas do not have the same services
outside the dominant routes
and main centers have the same, um,
and pay more for seats, have layovers for connecting fights.
Uh, I would use the argument of John Ross that
inequalities either the social economic are only
to be allowed if the worst off
will be better off than they might have been under an
equal distribution.
Believe that the airline model should be one
where people pay for distance, not the market model.
Uh, Believe the current model does not allow the
passenger to reconcile the price from the cost
of the business providing the service.
So I want more transparency as a customer.
Okay. Question this. That's very clear.
Thank you. Thank you so much,
Max. I have
two. I'm going away to Melbourne. I have two flights.
Yeah. I have my, my flight going there
and my flight returning.
The, um, I am paying twice as much for my return flight.
And, um, that, that to me seems, um, strange.
Okay. Um, thank you so much, max. Thank you.
Uh, next we have Monopoly watch.
Um, they're in person as well.
10 minutes. Thank you. Uh, yes, 10 minutes. Uh, is the text.
Yeah, text He Rich, thank you
so much. Yeah. Thank you for making time
And you've seen hard works. Thank
you. The, uh, timer. Appreciate it.
Monopoly watch is a small private public policy group.
It's privately funded.
Um, I had some experience in telecommunications,
sold out my telco business,
and I fund Monopoly watch in, in, in a private capacity.
That's quite important because today we haven't had
the real people identified
who are speaking at this conference
or who've submitted in this process.
It's really critical that the committee understand that
behind the law firms, there's clients.
Those clients need to be identified
for this process to be sent.
I'm gonna whip through a few, a few points
and then I'll open myself for questions.
We believe it's so serious
that the act needs to be pulled out.
The sent back to the mb.
It's not satisfactory to pass this through parliament.
It's a comedy show, and it's an era of judgment,
which plays the hands of the people who,
who are trying to prevent this from happening.
It's, it's, it's, it's an own goal
because it's actually creating more confusion
around competition, which plays into the hands
of the incumbents and the market power.
Um, monopoly watch studies, supermarkets, banks,
building materials, fueled insurance companies.
We've done airports and airlines. So we'll talk about that.
Um, as we can spin through, we, we think that
competition policy should be bipartisan.
You are fighting off the Russians.
You are fighting off the defense.
The defense of New Zealand and,
and the public welfare of people in emergency response units
normally, uh, create a bipartisan, um,
activity Competition.
You are not pre, pre preventing us from the
Russians invading on this occasion.
You are preventing us from corporates extracting
and taking the mickey out of you in this report here,
the OECD report, 2024,
you've had the Mickey taken out of you.
Um, only last month I was in, sorry,
December I was in Australia at the A
NZ shareholders meeting.
Um, and, uh, compound to, uh, 15 outta 10
for the compliment about why the banks
had bought the fintechs.
But a NZ are taking the mickey out of, out of, out of a,
a public policy setting here.
It was really interesting to see the large law firm
who wouldn't identify who their clients were.
And I think their exact words were, you,
you've gotta have the right, um, policy settings,
otherwise, LA large businesses won't come here.
Well, there's several businesses
that have looked here and pulled out.
HSBC have pulled out K enough.
The world's largest plasterboard manufacturers started here,
invested a lot of money and zipped off.
Why? Because the competition, law protected incumbency,
competition law has three legs.
One law,
and we've heard from a lot of lawyers, two economists,
nine times out of 10, the economists are paid for
by some third party vested interest.
And including, including groups like business nz, they and,
and, and New Zealand initiative.
If they cataloged who they're working for, we might
as well just be listening to Woolworths food stuffs
big four energy companies, big four banks.
Um, so it's really important that actually
somebody in is engaging in this process, whose financial
has financial capability and financial understanding,
and all competition regulators
and policy makers globally have three legs in their,
in their policy making lawyers.
Yes, we've heard from them, economists,
they're often vested interest.
But financial analysts now,
all the financial analysts here are sitting up in Auckland
or Wellington in their dealing rooms, happy as Harry
because they're extracting what we call monopoly rents.
Or they're taking the Mickey out
of New Zealand consumers in low tech utility businesses
by excessive profitability.
The three PA main reasons why you can justify sending this
back thing to the NV and send the MV off to Scandinavia.
Please don't send them off to Aussie.
Aussie is not our friend here. Aussie's part of the problem.
Um, Aussie's got its own competition, law problems.
Let's look at their supermarkets, their banks, just
for starters before we go to the electricity,
their electricity and, and oil companies.
So send, send the team in the, in their, uh, defense jet
or borrow a NZ jet, send them up to Scandinavia, Denmark,
Sweden, Finland, Norway, go
to Brussels and look at best practice.
The three reasons why before I ask questions,
you can send this back to MB
to regurgitate it and, and come up with it.
Something that's has higher strategic intensity.
Point one, there's no
AI component in the bill.
It's 2026.
Unless I'm mistaken, and maybe I'm,
I've had the wrong chip put into me this morning,
but I'm sure it's 2026.
I'm sure, I'm sure that American government, that, that,
sorry, not the American government,
but the American industry spent 3% of GDP like, you know,
almost one and a half trillion dollars on AI infrastructure.
It's coming. I came down here on the shuttle this morning.
I came down at Jetstar,
but it's gonna come down on a NZ
oh, sorry, on Air New Zealand.
And the AI pricing algorithm was working on the a
on the a, uh, in New Zealand app this morning,
respectfully, government pays.
So there's no AI component.
That's, that's, that's tick one, tick two,
there's no adequate protections around industries,
associations, codes, and behaviors.
And it was useful that we had the TCF, um, in the,
in the committee room this morning
because Telstra sent a deceased
and desist order to me,
because I used to call the TCF,
the Telecommunications Cartel Forum in the 16 years.
It took me to do a pro, an infrastructure project
that should have taken me six months
that I was on the record of taking six months
where accredited 3000 jobs and,
and was the equivalent of a 2% tax cut when we broke
up the telco cartel.
We used to call the TCF,
the Telecommunications Cartel Forum.
And we have the, the Banking Cartel Forum.
It's just called the Bankers Association.
We have the energy group.
It's, they're all cartel groups
to not have more prescriptive legislation on
what they can and cannot do.
You are leading consumers in New Zealand into a
further cost of living crisis.
Third point I, I've got it, five or six others,
but I'm just gonna do three points of why you can pick this
act up and send it back to nb.
The third point is the predatory pricing gig. Right?
It's just not good enough. You are adults.
This is an Arab parliament,
and we need definitions of market power de definitions
of predatory pricing, not pushed over by the lobby law firms
that just want to have a nice afternoon on the boat.
And I, I, I'm the biggest beneficiary of their,
their sausage rolls.
I, they entertain me all the time.
And, you know, they, they're great caterers.
And I'm, I'm, I'm ob seriously need to
highlight the conflict
of interest on how much food or there's I eat.
But, um, it, it, it's just not okay
because predatory pricing, pocket pricing, sac war, cat war,
um, geographic monopolization,
these issues aren't covered off in the act.
And in New Zealand, we have such a weak
and lazy definition of market power.
It's outrageous because everybody says, well,
you can't have two players having market power.
Well, you know, a lot of markets, banks
and energy companies, it's four players
and they all behave rationally.
Um, and rationally, I mean, um, against consumer interests,
you are here to protect consumer interests.
This bill is not protecting consumer interests.
We've got two seconds and then I got some questions. Um,
The benchmarking componentry of the act doesn't work.
I'm complimentary of the regulatory impact statement.
I, I, I think there's been some fantastic comments made, um,
about what the problem is.
Um, and I quote, um, one of the officials saying,
no agile response to structural market problems.
It's a major problem. Le point number five in the regulatory
impact statement, legal uncertainty around AI
and algorithmic correlation.
Let's get the MB back on the shuttle, getting down
to Mango Airport, up to, to buy through to Brussels and,
and see what international best practice is.
'cause as we speak, the Brits are doing a, a little bit
of a harker on this thing.
They have a massive campaign on
AI in competition oil.
Last point. It's outrageous.
There's no consumer advocacy in this matter. Crikey.
I mean, it's outrageous.
And people laugh at me and, and I, I enjoy the jokes
and I eat the sausage robs.
And, uh, most people go,
thank God we've got somebody as useless as you.
Tick Edwards on the other side of the argument.
And to my response is, it's a sad day for New Zealand.
You've just got ERs at, at, at, at monopoly watch trying
to fight off 30,000, 20,000 lobbyists, the law firms
and, and the, the, the true value of incumbency.
It's really strategic that,
that consumer New Zealand hasn't come here with, with,
you know, a substantive piece of work.
You know, with international benchmarking.
Forget Australia, they're not gonna help us.
They're taking the mickey out of us.
We what's happening in Denmark, um,
after the session, lobby's still be in your office.
Um, and they'll be, they'll be explaining to everybody.
I haven't caught a fish at Waki this summer,
and I'm it grumpy and I apologize for that.
Um, I'll close off on private litigation
and it's covered off in the regulatory
impact statement quite nicely.
I think it's useful to have private litigation,
the Commerce Commission and MB can't do it all themselves
and leaving consumer competition,
law enforcement open to private litigation.
I think it's helpful. It's not perfect, but it's helpful.
Thank you for listening to me.
Thank you so much. No, we have run out of time.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you. Um, next we have news publishers.
Yes, thank you.
Now I need to come. Is that Brooke Cameron? That's right.
Thank you so much. We have 10 minutes with you. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak
to our submission on the commerce, um, amendment bill today.
My name is Brooke Cameron and I'm the general manager
of the News Publishers Association.
Our association champions New Zealand's news media industry
and represents our members' interests in areas that support,
um, support, sorry, I'll just take a deep breath.
Um, that's support, support the sustainability
of the news journalism industry.
It's an industry that's essential to a strong democracy,
social cohesion, and a healthy society in New Zealand.
I'm here today on behalf of our members
to strongly support the proposal
to empower the Commerce Commission to undertake
targeted regulation studies
and recommend appropriate regulatory responses.
Our members include a range of local, regional,
and national New Zealand news media companies
who are under threat due to significant bargaining
and balance between their businesses
and certain global digital platforms.
Three of these platforms, Amazon, Google,
and Meta now control more than half
of the global advertising market.
Much of this revenue comes off the back of their use of pro,
professionally produced news Journalism
that they don't pay New Zealand media companies for.
This is not only undermining journalism,
but it's undermining our democracy,
New Zealand tax paying businesses,
new Zealanders livelihoods,
and ultimately the New Zealand economy.
And by doing that, it's affecting all New
Zealanders living standards.
It's not just an issue here in New Zealand.
News media globally are grappling
with this bargaining and balance.
Earlier this month, the UK competition
and markets authority propose new requirements on Google
to make sure that publishers, including news
and other content producers get a fairer deal over
how their content is used and gave Google AI overviews.
That's one example. To put it simply,
large global digital platforms are generating audiences
and revenue using somebody else's content.
Content that news publishers,
they're doing this without permission, without remuneration.
And it's, it's content that our publishers are investing
to produce for the good of our country.
Um, it it's happening in, it's happening all over the world,
but particularly you've probably heard more recently in
Australia and Canada are trying
to make inroads in this space as well.
But it's moving at a rate of nods and we're falling behind.
To give you some sobering facts
and some examples about how it's actually impacting right
here in New Zealand, we've had more than 40,
40 New Zealand community newspapers close in recent years.
It's affecting our local communities, including at times
of crisis, such as the recent weather events
that we've had around our country.
In addition to that, the total number of journalists in all
of New Zealand is now less than
those employed by the New York Times.
So it's affecting our jobs
and it's also affecting local stories that get told here.
And if, if that's not enough,
it's actually the theft of copyright works.
Um, I spent a lot of time talking about this to people.
It's copyright works that it's from tax paying New Zealand
businesses, New Zealand journalists,
and it's affecting livelihoods and our economy.
Um, the person performing just spoke about ai.
Um, these issues existed before the rise of AI
and are now being exacerbated
by the rapid advance of this technology.
This is why we support the proposal
to empower the Commerce Commission
to undertake targeted regulation studies so
that you can see the impact all
of this is having on our local economy.
So as you can see, there is an acute
and urgent need for the regulation study in relation
to the news media sector
that I represent when this bill is enacted, so
that they can actually get into the details
and understand the issues that are affecting this industry.
All we're seeking is a level playing field
and fair payment for the use
of our quality FactCheck professional journalism that,
as I said earlier, our members
and even the wider industry invest in producing the global
digital platforms, are simply taking it
and using it to grow massive businesses
that benefit a small amount
of shareholders at the expense of all of us.
All New Zealanders enabling the commission
to undertake regulation studies will provide a cost
effective, efficient, and apolitical avenue
for the significant market issues in the New Zealand news
media sector to be considered.
It'll also be critical,
however, for the commission to be able to move quickly,
as I've said, with the developments
and technology to respond to market changes driven
by those developments and to be appropriately resourced
to work for the work the revised legislation will enable.
We do have one liner amendment that we would like
to suggest, and that would,
and we believe it would enhance the positive outcomes from
such regulation studies.
And that would be to expand the scope beyond pro competition
to be not only pro competition, but to also
otherwise be in the public interest.
All New Zealanders will suffer if we don't have a strong
local media industry.
In summary, the MPA is grateful for the opportunity
to be present here and talk to you through this today.
We're here in strong support at the commission,
being empowered to carry out regulation studies.
As I've said, protecting independent New Zealand news
content is an essential cornerstone to our democracy,
as is protecting New Zealanders
and New Zealand business from exploitation
by big tech companies whose annual revenue is more than
double New Zealand's annual GDP.
This change is critical
as just one step towards supporting the New Zealand economy
and our tax base that pays for the things
that matter to all New Zealanders.
Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Um, yes, uh,
Thank you Madam Chair and thank you for an excellent, um,
submission and for taking us through that.
So well absolutely hearing you on the challenges
and closures in the local media sector
and the huge negative impacts that has for communities,
but also democracy more widely curious if you are able
to put for us an estimated kind
of dollar value on what's being taken out
of the New Zealand market.
It doesn't, we won't hold you to it, but as a ballpark,
Um, I probably couldn't pull a number together
for you right now, but I'm happy to do that.
But I suppose from our submission,
you'll see it's actually affected
many different parts of it.
It's not just jobs, it's not just advertising revenue, it's,
it's not just one of those things.
So, um, I wouldn't want to say a number here,
but I'm happy to pull together, um, an indication
for you and itemize those.
That would be fantastic.
Okay. Alright. Thank you. Good.
Uh, Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah. You mentioned copyright.
It's difficult to find
unless you're gonna go into the court and define it.
Um, so it was very tricky for you in your members in terms
of, uh, news made today may be taken from other sources.
Suddenly copyright, they had previous copyright science.
How we define it. Is
that something you think we should be considering more about
how you actually define and protect it?
Um, we have things in place right now.
We also have the media copyright agency where we work
with people that use our publishers content,
um, for business purposes.
And we have ways to license that currently.
So we believe the Copyright Act is already encompasses
and covers that side of things in terms of the digital
platforms, the international platforms,
it's a bit more difficult given
they're outside our jurisdiction. So that's what we need.
Yeah. So the pinch point is being unable to enforce it
Outside of New Zealand. Yeah.
Right, Greg? Um, yeah, look much
of my digital ignorance with a piece of news, you know,
like you've got a digit, sorry, you've got a, an image,
you can own an image or it can be followed.
Is it possible in the industry create, so it's a piece
of news, a piece of text
can be owned digitally.
Um, so sort of it reappears somewhere. It's identified.
Copyright is inherent in the content
that our publishers produce.
Um, yes. So in an article, what what's happening though is
that the digital platforms are, are scraping that
and taking that and putting it into their larger language
learning models and then repro producing it so
that you can't tell where it came from, its original form.
So you can't tell. So there's no way,
there's no technology that is allowing you
to actually follow that piece of script, not
to the scale as being identifiable,
Not to the scale at this stage of what, what that
that theft is taking
and then putting in and the reproducing.
Mm-hmm. So if it's rewritten, sorry if it's rewritten,
but if it's not rewritten, if it's taken as a, as a chunk,
like I turned on Google, I'm reading something
that I previously produced in Westport News.
Is that not identifiable?
Yes. And that should be, that is
breach of copyright, isn't it?
Somebody using somebody's content that they've produced
for a purpose that they don't have permission for, but
That's what they're doing. Yep, exactly
What they're doing. They, they do that,
but they also suck it into a big engine
and then reword it.
So we can't see that as well. Reword. So they're doing both.
Thank you. It's good
clarification. Thank you so much for your
Submission. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Uh, next we have the Office of the Ombudsman.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you John. And thank you Mark.
Uh, we have 10 minutes with you.
Thank you very much. And thank you for the opportunity to,
uh, talk to our submission, uh,
because of the time constraints we have, I want
to focus specifically on clauses 52
and 53, uh, of the bill.
Uh, you will be well aware, uh,
that those clauses significantly, significantly extend,
uh, the ability of the commission to, um,
hold information, um,
and make it not subject to the Official Information Act.
Uh, their current regime under section 100 allows 'em to do
that for the period of investigation plus 20 days
under this bill.
First in, uh, clause 52, uh, they would be able
to make an order which prevented publication
for 10 years.
And then in clause 53, confidential information
made available to the commission is able to be held again
for 10 years with an ability to extend
it seems in an open-ended fashion.
So these are very,
very significant changes, uh, in my view.
They are excessive,
and I say that they are excessive for two reasons.
First, because to make a change of this character
to this extent, you would expect to be able to see
explicit evidence that required such an extension.
My office has been engaged, uh, with those
who have been drafting the legislation
and exploring these issues with them.
And while they have referred to anecdotal examples
of behaviors which might justify some ability to extend,
uh, there is no actual evidence, uh,
that I can say I have seen, which supports the extension,
uh, which is being proposed.
And I should say that that is consistent
with the experience I've had since coming into this role
in which public servants in a variety of different areas
have commented to me about the so-called chilling effect
of the OIA on particular behaviors or opportunities.
But when pushed have never been able to identify an example
to me, uh,
in which the Official Information Act has not adequately
protected, uh, the particular issue, uh,
that they are referring to.
And so what I would ask the committee
to do in your deliberations here, uh, is
to look at the evidence that requires this level
of extension, uh, of, uh, the ability to
preclude publication, uh, or, uh, distribution
or exposure, uh, of information.
Because in my view, there isn't evidence that supports it.
Now, the explanatory note to the bill, uh,
anchors the change in provisions, uh,
under the FMA Act, uh, and the Reserve Bank Act.
And it's right to say that those two pieces
of legislation do have provisions which provide the ability,
uh, to prohibit, uh, publication
or distribution of information.
But in the case of the FMA, that is only for the period
of the inquiry, uh, that they are undertaking.
And in the case of the Reserve Bank, uh, that is
for a period of up to three years.
So what you can see here is a very,
very significant extension, uh, to
that period of prohibition.
Uh, and, uh, in my view, for that to occur,
uh, it would need substantive
evidence to support it.
The reason that I say that is
because the Official Information Act actually provides,
in my view, a perfectly effective set of mechanisms
to balance the competing requirements for confidentiality
and protection of people who are disclosing information, uh,
under an obligation of confidence
and the wider public interest in understanding
how the particular organization, in this case,
the Commerce Commission, is reaching decisions, uh,
which are fundamental to the lives of New Zealanders.
Those provisions are well known
to members of this committee.
Uh, you understand that under section six C of the OIA Act,
you can make a, there's no even,
there's not even a public interest, uh, requirement.
If it's required to enable, uh, the implementation
of the law, uh, then it will be protected.
And then under section nine two B
and nine two BA nine 2D, uh, there are a range
of provisions which explicitly address, uh,
the particular issue, which is being, um, uh,
extended here or addressed here.
Now, the reason that I am concerned about this is because
before the Official Information Act,
we had a culture of secrecy.
And the Dans committee rightly said
that secrecy is corrosive to trust in government.
It is corrosive to public understanding of government,
and it is corrosive to the ability of the public
to participate effectively in the
government of their country.
And that understanding from the Dans Committee
turned this whole regime, uh, on its head with the principle
that in, in information would be made available subject
to certain protections.
As you know, section 14 of the Bill
of Rights Act allows people access to information.
As you know, the public of New Zealand
actively uses the provisions of the Official Information Act
under that, uh, bora, uh, rights protection, uh,
to access information, to enable them
to participate in mechanisms like this
with select committees,
to understand the basis on which decisions are made.
Now we recognize absolutely that there will be circumstances
and that there are circumstances in which information
needs to be protected.
And when we see that we do protect it and we can protect it,
and we have protected it.
And as I say, I know of no example that anybody has
yet presented to me where they say that we've,
that the actions of the, uh, of our office in terms
of the application of the Official Information Act,
have resulted in any of the, uh,
so-called anecdotal chillings, uh, that, uh,
are sometimes referred to.
So, in my mind, Madam Chair, these provisions are
excessive, unnecessary, and inappropriate.
I do not believe that they've found it on appropriate
evidence, or if they are, that that evidence has been, uh,
exposed, uh, in any meaningful way.
And I do not believe that they're necessary.
And in my mind, the risk you run,
if you allow this particular type
of provision in this legislation without an evidential base,
is that you will corrode public confidence in the, uh,
principles of the Official Information Act.
Uh, and that you, you'll open some sort of, uh,
slippery slope, I suppose, uh,
moving us away from transparency, away from the principle
of the availability of information back to a culture
of secrecy, uh, which was
what the Dans Committee overturned. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Off, uh, I'll ask a question.
So you said that, um,
the information when it is released under OIA,
I don't think there is any filling effect, uh, created.
You, we haven't seen the evidence of that,
and we heard from another submitter who said that it's
because of that, because they don't want their information
to be, um, revealed under OIA, that they're reluctant to,
uh, inform if they see any such behavior
that they think should be in, uh, reported.
What, like you've talked about evidence as well.
So how would you go about getting that evidence
and what will be a, in your view, a validated way
of collecting that evidence that we then a hundred percent,
like we are sure that yes,
that's why people are not actually reporting?
Well, first, in terms of the comments that were made
by your submitter, without knowing the, all the facts of
that particular individual
or the circumstances that they were submitting into,
what I would say to you is that if you look at,
if they look at the, uh, provisions
of the Official Information Act,
and I've just been through the relevant provisions, uh,
with you, they will see, uh, that there is perfectly, uh,
there is a, there's legislation available, uh, which can,
and would, if the circumstances were appropriate,
protect their information.
Uh, so, so, uh, it's,
I suspect comes from a misunderstanding
or a lack of appreciation, uh, of the way in which the
Official Information Act is written
and the way in which the Official Information Act is applied
in terms of the collection of information
that would support this.
Uh, my, I don't have an answer to you as to
what the appropriate process would be,
but I do have a view that
unless people can move beyond sort of anecdotal supposition
to some sort of substantive view that the current regime
is not appropriate, then changing the current regime
is unnecessary.
And as I've said, raises risks in terms
of the public confidence, uh, in their ability
to access information appropriately
and to have their concerns assessed by an independent agency
that is an officer of this parliament. Mm-hmm.
Uh, Dr. Hamish, Excellent. Thank you.
And thank you submission. John, a
Quick question. Yes.
Um, if you take your, your argument is
that the OIA has enough protections in for, uh, protecting
sensitive data, commercial data, et cetera.
So therefore, would you, would you actually argue that,
of course, this is proposing a 10 year kind of, um, limit
currently while the study's going on,
there's, there's a limit.
Would you actually say that limit is therefore not required
because using your argument, OIA, would actually protect it,
so therefore that, that it should be able
to be released immediately?
No, I've said, I, I mean, I,
I don't have a particular problem with the current, uh,
section a hundred, and I don't have a, a, a problem
with the idea that, uh, you've seen in the FMA that we're,
that they're undertaking an investigation that
that should be protected by the
investigation being taken place.
You are right. That if that provision wasn't there,
I do still believe that that, uh, uh,
that information would be protected under
the Official Information Act.
But, but, uh, I'm, I'm not, I'm not suggesting, uh,
going back and, uh, uh, retrospectively, uh, you know,
changing, uh, the legislation in place.
All I'm saying to you is it's a very significant shift.
Mm. Do believe.
Absolutely. We don't have time for any more questions.
We'll have to conclude there.
Thank you so much, uh, for your submission. Thank you.
So members, we have, um, uh, do we have the next,
or shall we go for the break?
We have a break scheduled now. Yeah,
Breaks scheduled now,
but I was just thinking my,
alright, so members, um, I think we will carry on
and, uh, yeah, so we have Chapman trip.
Yes, yes, please. Yeah, the front page. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Is that Lucy Cooper and Simon Port.
Thank you. That's right. We have 10 minutes with you. Thank
You. Thanks. Um,
okay, so to make the most of our time,
we thought we would just, um, go over three topics to start
with predatory pricing, the widening
of the substantial lessening of competition test, you know,
aimed at mergers and confidential information.
Then we'll stop and see if anyone has questions,
and if we've got time we'll cover creeping acquisitions.
Um, but please interrupt if you have questions as we go,
we can, um, we'd like to be of help so we can talk
to any part of our submission or the bill.
So Simon's gonna start with predatory pricing,
Right? So our, uh,
recommendation is
to remove the predatory pricing provision from the bill, um,
that has have very strong recommendations
as I imagine you may have heard from a few firms.
Uh, currently predatory pricing is unlawful, uh,
if it's likely to substantially lessen competition.
The bill, uh, in contrast would deem below cost pricing
for a sustained period to be unlawful regardless
of its competition or consumer impacts.
Uh, we think that is a significantly retrograde step
deeming provisions in the Commerce Act traditionally,
both in New Zealand and overseas, limited to cartel conduct,
uh, on the basis that cartel conduct, um, is sort of so bad.
There is almost never a pro consumer argument in
favor of doing it.
Um, the, the same is not the case for below cost
or, or low pricing.
Low pricing is almost always in the interest of consumers.
That is generally accepted and competition law
and policy in New Zealand, uh,
and internationally only very rarely is low pricing
or below cost pricing contrary to the interests
of consumers.
And it is worthwhile just bearing in mind
what a predatory pricing complaint actually is.
It is a supplier saying to its competitor
or to a the Commerce Commission,
you should raise your prices
because I'm not making enough money.
And the solution to a predatory pricing complaint is
that consumer prices go up.
There's a number of misconceptions, uh, in the bill
and in the policy work that lies behind it.
There's a suggestion that this is merely
codifying the existing law.
The answer is that it does not.
Uh, the substantial listening of competition tests
that currently applies allows for a full assessment of all
of the circumstances and consumer impacts associated
with low pricing or below cost pricing.
A deeming provision of this kind would eliminate
consideration of all of those factors.
And in our submissions, we've outlined a number
of scenarios in which presumptively competitive
or pro-consumer pricing would be banned by this provision.
Is it in line with the law of other countries?
It is not, it is not consistent with the law in Australia.
Uh, most comparable, uh, jurisdiction
or with the European Union, none of those, uh,
jurisdictions, uh,
operate a deeming provision for predatory pricing.
It is subject to a competition test as it is currently here.
And is an objective test, as it were,
better from an enforcement perspective than the current
requirement to consider all of the competition
and consumer impacts?
No, we would say not if it precludes consideration
of circumstances that are in fact relevant
to consumer outcomes.
So our recommendation, our strong recommendation is
to remove that provision in its entirety.
Uh, if the committee is resolved to include it in, in some,
uh, by some means, then our recommendation would be
to turn it into a rebuttable presumption.
So there is at least the option to make arguments
that in this instance below cost pricing is
nonetheless in favor of consumers and pro-competitive.
Okay, thanks Simon. I will do the widening
of the substantial lessening of competition test,
which we also recommend is removed from the bill.
Uh, we can, we can understand some of the concerns
that are raised here and it would be really helpful if the
Commerce Commission expanded its merger guidelines
and gave us some more assistance.
Um, but there's no need to change the law
and we think there are some real adverse
consequences that could arise.
So I mean, the first, the first problem we've identified
with this one is that the issue that is trying to solve,
we don't think actually really exists.
So we haven't been able to think of any examples
that this new widened test would, um, allow, um,
to make transactions unlawful that would be lawful, but,
but bad, uh, under the current law, um, the,
the commission has plenty of scope to decline clearance
and there's plenty of ways that, um, it can be argued.
Transactions are unlawful.
As an example, it, it controversially declined the, um,
alpha Theta acquisition of Serato, which, you know, a lot
of the commentary has described along the lines
of a killer acquisition, which is the kind of thing, uh,
that this change is meant to deal with.
And precisely because it's so hard to think of
what the new words will change or add.
Um, it means that adding these words creates a real lack
of clarity, um,
and it makes it difficult to understand
how we should think about, um, mergers in the future
and what we should be worried about.
Um, and that obviously makes it harder for people
to be confident about where they stand
and make decisions about carrying out mergers.
When, when we talk about this, I think it's really important
to remember that there's no size threshold for mergers
that the Commerce Commission can consider.
So these are not problems that are just relevant
to the really big end of town large corporates, et cetera.
So a good example is the commission is currently looking at
a merger of, um, whitewater rafting operators in,
so that process started in mid-November
and is scheduled to finish around mid-April
and it could be extended further.
So that's about a five month process
for some rafting operators that, you know, don't,
don't appear to be particularly large businesses.
And that's no criticism of the Commerce Commission, like
that's the commission is conducting the process
that it is meant to conduct under the law.
It's really just to illustrate
that if we further complicate this law, that it,
it has real impacts on, you know, on real people
and they, they can be expensive.
Um, so finally, um, and
and importantly about this change, all
of the commentary in the works is about mergers.
So it's about expanding the mergers test,
but in the bill the change itself applies well
beyond mergers to wherever a substantial listing
of competition test applies.
So there are consequences for the legal threshold
for a range of matters, not just mergers.
And those matters haven't actually been identified as
a problem at this stage.
So it, it throws, you know,
some more general uncertainty into the mix as well.
I dunno how much time I've taken up.
I'll hand back to Simon to do confidential information.
So there are provisions in the bill which would allow the
commission to, uh, withhold information, um,
or exempt it from the application
of the official Information Act.
We understand the policy objective, uh, and,
and there are some, you know,
some sensible thinking behind that.
The one point that we want to just register is that, uh,
many much of the information
that the Commerce Commission discloses is disclosed
to people who are subject to commerce Commission processes
and it is disclosed to them.
So they have an opportunity to reflect
and comment on that information
before the commission makes a determination that is going
to significantly affect their rights and interests.
That's a fundamental principle
of natural justice in our legal system,
that a public agency doesn't make decisions based on
information that affects you,
that you don't have an opportunity to comment on
and if appropriate to, to rebut.
So we would want it to be made very clear in this bill
that the commission cannot withhold from parties who would
otherwise under ordinary principles
of natural justice receive that information, uh,
in circumstances which would compromise their ability
to participate fully in those processes
and test the evidence that is called against them.
So we'll just stop there.
Um, if anyone has any questions, please, Christian. Uh, Dr.
Excellent, thank you. So just to be clear
for on your predatory pricing, uh, uh, ideas
and opinions, are you saying there's no such thing
as predatory pricing, uh, in any market in New Zealand?
I'm saying that the deeming provision would render
unlawful below cost pricing in a range of circumstances
in which we would say that is
pro-consumer or pro-competitive.
The idea of a deeming provision is
to say no further inquiry is required
beyond simply having regard to these two considerations,
which in this case is, is it below these measures of cost
and is it more than short term In its nature,
there are a range of situations in which businesses set
prices below cost
and circumstances that are good for consumers or are
or are, you know, healthy competition.
It's simply wrong to assume that below cost pricing
for more than say three months at a time is
always going to be predatory.
That's why we have a competition test in the current law.
Dr. David Wilson, do you have a question?
Yeah, um, I think Hamish kind of asked my question,
but I've got a supplementary,
I'm not sure you actually answered his question.
So do you believe that predatory pricing
is happening in New Zealand?
Don't have a view on whether predatory pricing is
happening in New Zealand at the moment.
Do you have a particular sector in mind?
Uh, well, you know, there, there's law, there's um,
economics as well in terms of, you know,
small isolated economy.
At the bottom of the world we are prone to, uh,
shall we say oligopolistic
tendencies and we already have it.
And we know this through the research that's been done
through the Communist Commission.
So when you have that situation in your economy, it is open
to that kind of practice.
And hence the good question from my colleague Hamish,
which I don't think has been answered.
It, it it's rare honestly for there to be instances
of predatory pricing which are genuinely
contrary to consumer interests.
There's a separate, separate question you're asking,
which is, are there other negative outcomes from
highly concentrated markets?
And, and yes there are
and that's why the commission has a range of tools
to address those, including its regulatory toolbox. Right?
Low Sufficient, low pricing is
very seldom bad for consumers. Okay.
Alright, we'll have to conclude it there.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
So members, I know that we were supposed to have a break.
We, if members wish to have a break now we can do that
because time-wise we are looking good.
Um, but our next submitter is ready as well,
so the option is open whether we carry on Got Breastfe.
So I'm happy for you guys to carry on. It's all good.
All right. So we carry on.
We have, uh, the University of Sydney online. Zoom.
Thank you. Good question.
Six minute. Yes,
Rob Nichols.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Uh, we have 10 minutes with you and you know how it works.
Thank you.
Okay, thank you Chair members of the committee, Kia Aura
and thank you for the opportunity to appear.
I welcome the Bill's broader reform program.
In my view, it will leave New Zealand with a very strong
and appropriate competition law regime.
My concern is very narrow and very technical.
Clause eight, repeal section 46 on the basis
that section 83 6 renders it redundant
in my view that reasoning is wrong.
Section 83 6 addresses only pecuniary penalties.
It says nothing about the criminal cartel liability.
The unenforceable
or unenforceability of merger agreements under section 27
or damages claims by third parties
repealing section 46 without replacement exposes parties to
ordinary mergers to potential criminal prosecution.
No comparable jurisdiction has done this.
My recommendation is simple retain section 46
or replace it with a provision that closes these gaps.
I'd be happy to assist the committee
with drafting appropriate language
and very happy to take any questions.
That's great. Um, thank you so much members.
Any questions really clear? Yeah.
Uh, members are saying that it's really clear, so thank you
so much for your submission. All
Right, thank you very much indeed. Have a
Good day. Bye-bye. Bye.
Right. Um, do we have a next sumative lineup?
Um, we have checking slightly.
Oh, all right. So we, um, then go for a break.
Yeah, we just in time. University of Sydney.
Oh, they just finished. Oh no, there a second.
There's a second one. Yeah, the University of Sydney School.
Oh, the business school. Yeah, the second one. Yes.
Let's, let's, uh, get them online. Yeah. Thank you.
This
its the same one.
Yes, you are online and we can see you as well.
Thank you. Can you hear me?
Yes. Um, can you hear us?
Yes, we can. Thank you so much.
And we have 10 minutes with you, right?
And this includes, um, uh, uh, the time
for questions if there is any time
left. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um,
so my name is Lisa Asher and Catherine Sutton.
Brady and from, we are from the
University of Sydney Business School.
Um, our submission, um, is based on pro competition.
Um, and it largely focuses on the substantial listening
of competition in the market.
And we believe that, um, the current bill as it stands is
probably doesn't address a lot of this or enough of this.
And so we're gonna draw on a couple
of the examples from our written submission, um,
that we will talk to now.
But I think the overarching theme is that the law
as it stands or the proposed bill does not go far
enough. So I'll hand over to
Catherine.
Um, and I would just like to point out, um,
our submission is based on, um, several years
of research into the, um, grocery industry,
but we do think it's generalizable across
other industries as well.
Um, one of the first things we, um, would bring
to your attention is the vertical integration of markets.
And, um,
we have seen over the past few years within the, um,
grocery industry that vertical integration has increased.
This integration is where the, um, supermarket,
um, retailers are going into food processing
and manufacturing, um, into other areas of markets as well,
such as, um, data analytics and transportation.
And what this does is lessens competition
because it takes away competitive processes in this.
Um, and a lot of the research
that's been done in this area shows that in markets
with high concentrations such as New Zealand, um,
the market power of these players continues to increase.
And with vertical integration that, um,
market power increases even more.
So we see greater para asymmetries,
which clearly lessens competition in the market.
So our recommendation is that the bill should include, um,
regulatory scrutiny of vertical
integration in these markets.
The, um, next area that we would look at is the whole area
of, um, dual conflict.
Now a dual conflict occurs when a
supplier within
or a, a buyer within a market becomes a
competitor of its supplier.
And this, in this particular case,
we're looking at private label brands,
and as we know,
supermarkets have their own private label brands which
compete with branded products.
Now, um, the growth in private label brands over the last 20
years has been significant.
And what we have seen as a result of
that growth right across the world, not just in New Zealand,
is a massive lessening of competition, um, to the extent
that suppliers are being driven out of the market.
The main issue we have with this is that
the dual conflict that exists is that the
supermarkets have access
to performance data on their products.
They have access to performance data on their competitors'
products, but the competitors have no access
to performance data on the private labor brands.
So basically they're in a position of power.
What this then does is creates greater dependence, um,
of the suppliers on the supermarkets,
and we see, um, lots of instances where there is, um,
lessening of competition.
Um, and this is, um, a, a global trend
that we're also seeing play out in New Zealand.
So our recommendation for the bill is that, um, uh,
uh, dual conflict be specifically looked at
and a threshold be put in place on the market share of,
um, private label brands for supermarkets, um, to
increase competition and ensure that, um,
suppliers have a fair goal.
Okay, great. And so now I'm gonna talk to
what we call market orchestrating
or reducing competition in downstream markets.
So this again draws on some of the, um, examples, um,
within the supermarket or grocery industry.
Um, so one of the, so market orchestration
of markets within markets.
So retailers operate across many different departments
and categories, which you could argue
are markets within markets.
So say like milk or bred.
And what we found when we went considerably through, um, the
supplier information as provided through the market study
and some of our other empirical work is
that in the New Zealand context, um,
it was actually called out in supplier submissions
that they were actively tendering
and reducing, um, brands, um,
per category, um, for profit.
So this is what retailers were doing.
So per category, um, with a good example being Sea Lord,
within the frozen fish category in 2021, it made a lot
of press noise, um,
that they were being deleted from New World North Island.
Um, and this is quite a concern, um,
because it's a lot, it's a beloved New Zealand brand.
Um, but they did not meet the margin requirements
because of the significant power.
So what's happening is they're reducing the number
of suppliers in the market for profit.
Not because these products are not wanted by customers,
but it is going against a competitive process
purely just for profit.
So we're losing, um, supplies in the food chain, um,
on the food supply chain across multiple, um,
uh, categories.
And this will continue. So
although this conduct was called out in 2021, um,
it has continued
and if it hasn't been called outta something
that is anti-competitive, then it will continue with other,
um, retailers.
So the other point is the within
what was highly anti-competitive within the supplier
submissions is this concept of net net pricing.
So retailers, um, there are instances
where retailers are requesting, um,
that their suppliers give them a single price point
and they then take over the competition
between brands including their own, um, when it comes
to promotional discounts.
And so any promotional price or discount is being, um,
although it's at the retailer to set,
they take over the entire process
and incentives where suppliers might be able to, um,
compete throughout the year for whatever, um, uh,
from a pricing perspective.
And so we've made a recommendation there when it comes to,
um, a market orchestrator of markets, um,
that this be considered
with a substantially lessening competition
and removing competition from other markets
that this actually, um,
be included within the bill as a provision.
So I'm conscious of time, so I'll try
and, um, uh, be a little bit more pacey.
Um, so within one of our other recommendations, um,
as we've seen within, um, the European Union
and the uk, um, as well as the US that there needs to be,
um, tougher merger review guidelines for horizontal
and vertical mergers, including divestiture powers.
And so although Australia fell short in its own review,
that's not to say that New Zealand shouldn't, um,
and that these divestiture powers
that are granted within merger, um, reviews for
and including horizontal
and vertical, um, that these can act as a great deterrent
for anti-competitive conduct.
Um, so we also made another provision
or recommendation with regards to exclusive dealing
and third line forcing.
Um, this is an area, um, I'll talk to it very quickly, um,
that was included in Australia where I am, uh, to remove,
um, this anti-competitive nature of saying who they can
and cannot deal with and forcing them to say, use suppliers
that they wouldn't ordinary, uh, uh, where,
where a company has substantial market power to force their
suppliers, for example, to use particular vendors when they
wouldn't normally do so through a competitive process.
We also have pricing algorithms.
So I understand there was an earlier, um, submission, um,
where they talk to pricing, um,
and the lack of, um, algorithm algorithms being considered
within the law and pricing algorithms.
Um, there's been quite a bit of work done within the
European Union and also in the UK as part of our submission,
um, where it goes, they can facilitate collusion.
And so what um, can happen is where these
services or these algorithms have been empowered
to change prices based on what's going on, uh,
based on the marketplace.
If that's the case, then the organization should be held
accountable for their conduct if that actually ends up
as collusion, um, with unilateral conduct.
Um, so we believe, sorry, within the recommendation,
um, that there is, um, that companies be held accountable
for algorithmic collusion
because what can happen is they, if a price goes down
that's completely fine, but they do often go back
to a supplier and ask 'em to fund that.
But equally, if a price goes up
and the algorithm senses that, they just move it on up
and they've, um, they are colluding very much so on price.
And the last point is regarding cartel conduct.
So we acknowledge that the law has recently been
strengthened, um, to address some of this
and it's actually been tested, which is good,
but we think it actually needs to go further.
So within the European Union
and um, the Uni United Kingdom, we found
that they have provisions
for competitively sensitive information sharing.
So CSI, and so
what this also includes is commercial strategy
and operational details I am sharing between competitors.
So how this relates to grocery
and the grocery industry in New Zealand is that
you have Woolworths, New Zealand, foodstuffs North Island
and Foodstuffs South Island.
And there is, um, there are entities
that are set up which are outlined in our submission, um,
and we call it creeping coordination.
So where I am jointly owned entities by,
uh, buyers who compete as, um, in a market
with their suppliers, um, that they jointly own subsidiaries
where they knowingly share information which was
provided in their merger application.
So for South North Island and South Island in their merger
application where they facilitate the sharing
of retail strategy coordination, um,
and uh, other various matters.
And so in other jurisdictions this would be considered
highly anti-competitive
and we see this as what we call creeping coordination.
So there's quite a bit of detail there in our submission,
but our recommendation is that when you are a competitor,
um, I, when you are competing with your upstream suppliers,
um, the owning organ subsidiaries,
which facilitate the information sharing, um, should be, um,
prohibited, um,
and should also be considered collusion
within cartel conduct. And
Lisa and Catherine, sorry.
Sorry to interrupt. Uh, we have run out
of time for your submission.
Uh, thank you so much, uh, for your contribution. Thank
You very much. You
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Just wait
to see if you have the next,
Next we have Waikato.
We have Plant Chicken Growers Association online.
Oh yes, Anna, thank you so much for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you. Thank you. Oh,
Thank you very much.
Um, my name is Anna Ryan, um,
and I am a corporate barrister in competition law specialist
based at Canterbury Chambers in Christchurch.
Um, I do act for the Waikato Bay
of Chicken Growers Association.
I'm making this submission in my individual capacity.
Um, up until last year I was a partner at, uh,
national Law Firm Lane Neve,
where I headed the firm's national competition
and consumer protection law practice for the past decade.
Um, and I've got a keen interest in competition policy.
I chaired the Competition Law
and Policy Institute of New Zealand for five years from 2019
to 2024, and I still sit on the Institute's advisory
Board now.
Um, I imagine you've heard from submitters this morning on
a wide range of topics relating to the bill.
My submission relates specifically
to the new notification regime that has been proposed
for collective bargaining.
You will recall that the bill introduces a new process
whereby persons can notify the commission of their intention
to engage in collective bargaining.
And if the commission does not object within a certain
period of time, the conduct will be permitted.
Um, I'm delighted
that the bill introduces this new notification
regime at the moment.
Businesses that wish to engage in collective bargaining may
only do so after obtaining an authorization from the
Commerce Commission, which is a very expensive
and time consuming process.
Authorizations as a result are not common.
There have only been 10 in the last decade, I believe.
Um, and of those I think maybe three have related
to collective bargaining.
Um, over that period, I have applied for two authorizations
for collective bargaining.
One for the farmers who raised chickens
for inghams in the central y catho so
that they can collectively negotiate their supply agreements
with the chicken processor.
Um, and one authorization application for the farmers
who raised chickens for tegel.
And in both cases, those authorizations were granted,
but they were very laborious and costly
and they took several months to process.
The authorizations were both granted
for a period of 10 years.
And in the case of the Ingham's chicken farmers, um,
who obtained their authorization in 2017, this means
that they're due to reapply
for another authorization next year
unless the notification regime is implemented
and they are eligible to use it.
So the reason I'm submitting today is that I'm hoping
to ensure that the chicken farmers will in fact be eligible
to use the new notification regime.
Chicken Farmers in Australia have been able
to notify collective bargaining for a number of years now,
and it has been hugely beneficial in terms of time
and cost savings.
The provisions relating
to collective bargaining are set out in the new Schedule
eight of the Commerce Act.
And my submission relates to the wording of Schedule eight.
The schedule talks about the expected value
of collectively negotiated contracts,
and it says that the notification regime will be available
where parties reasonably expect the value of the goods
or services to be supplied under any contract
or arrangement resulting from the collective bargaining, um,
to be no more than $3 million over a 12 month period.
Uh, in my view, there's potential ambiguity in relation to
that $3 million threshold as to whether it applies
to each individual contract
that results from the collective negotiations
or from the sum total value of all
of the contracts resulting from the collective negotiations.
My submission is
that the $3 million value should be clearly stated to relate
to each individual contract.
Um, this would allow the notification regime to be used
for chicken farmer collective negotiations,
which is one obvious application of the new regime.
Um, I'd also like to submit
that there is no risk in applying the $3 million threshold
to individual contracts rather than negotiations
and their totality.
Um, and this is because if necessary,
the Congress Commission can object
to the collective negotiation
and require the parties to go
through a full authorization process.
So there is a safety valve there.
But also when parties are approved
to engage in collective negotiations, um, the person
that they want to bargain with still has
to agree to participate.
Um, if that party, uh, wants to,
they can insist on individual negotiations, um,
which means there's a built-in safety valve
where collective bargaining will only occur,
where all parties consider it
to be the most effective and efficient approach.
Um, so I'd just like to thank you very much
for the opportunity to make this submission.
It's obviously something that I'm quite passionate about,
um, and it's wonderful
to have the opportunity to have this input. So thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Christians members. No, it's all good.
Looking good. Thank you so much for your submission.
Oh, thank you. I'd just like
to take the opportunity while I have a moment to say also
that I would, um, fully endorse Ed Willis' submission in
respect of behavioral undertakings
that you heard this morning.
And also John LAN's submissions with regards to, um,
the proposed repeal of Section 46 as well.
So thank you very much. Alright, thank
You. Have a good day.
You too. Um, just wait
to see if we have the
next No.
Okay. So New Zealand society, we, uh,
are they happy to, uh, start
or they wish to wait for the other person?
We are on 15 minutes ahead.
Alright, so I think we'll have a break until 12 o'clock.
Come back at 12. Thank you.